---
title: Motivation
---

# What makes this course unique

This course is meant to teach _computer science students_ the fundamentals of secure, full stack web development. This differs from a lot of the content online that's aimed at self-taught developers or bootcamp graduates. We will be covering a lot of the same material, but with a focus on the _why_ and _how_ of the underlying technologies. This means that we will be diving into the details of how the web works, and how to build secure, performant, and maintainable web applications.

# Mixing Security with Full Stack Web Development

This course is also unique in that it is a mix of two different types of courses. The first is a web development course, which is focused on the technologies and best practices for building web applications. The second is a security course, which is focused on security fundamentals and best practices for securing web applications. A security course is no a prerequisite for this class, so we will be briefly covering a lot of the basics, as well as mixing in attacks and best practices for secure coding throughout each module.

# Module Structure

This course is broken into five different modules, each of which is focused on a different aspect of web development. The first module is focused on the basics of the web, and how the web works. The second module is focused on the front end, and how to build a modern, responsive, and accessible user interface. The third module is focused on the back end, and how to build a secure, performant, and maintainable server. The fourth module is focused on security, both foundational concepts and web security specifically. The fifth module is focused on system design, which zooms out from the other four topics to enable you to design a performant, efficient, and secure web application.
