---
title: Syllabus
slug: syllabus
---

# CS 484: Secure Web App Development

**(3 CR undergraduate, 4 CR graduate)**

## **I. Instructor & Course Details**

Chris Kanich, ckanich@uic.edu  
Drop-In Office Hours: 4pm-5pm Mondays, 3:30-4:30pm Tuesdays  
Drop-In Hours location: CDRLC 4411

Graduate TA: Iman Deol, ideol@uic.edu  
Drop-In Office Hours: 1:00pm-3:00pm Wednesdays  
Drop-In Hours location: CDRLC 2404

**Course Modality and Schedule**: This course is taught in person, location LC
C1, 2:00pm - 3:15pm Tuesdays and Thursdays. Please bring your laptop (with
battery if our classroom doesn't have plugs) for in-class activities.

**Piazza**: https://piazza.com/uic/fall2025/cs484 (this is open to all UIC CS students during the first two weeks of class - if you are not in the class and want to be allowed in off of the waitlist, please join to get the Gradescope invite code to turn in hw0)

**Gradescope**: https://www.gradescope.com/courses/1073379 (Check Piazza for the
invite code if you were not added automatically)

### Course Announcements

Whenever possible, course information will be conveyed using this website.
Course discussion will happen via Piazza. Course assignments and assignment
grades will be collected and returned through Gradescope. We will use iClicker
cloud for in-class participation. You are responsible for checking this website
for the reading schedule and ensuring that you complete all assignments, and
keeping up to date on Piazza for any corrections/clarifications regarding
assignments or other important information.

Blackboard will not be used in this course beyond the things which require it.
For all technical questions about Blackboard, email the Learning Technology
Solutions team at [LTS@uic.edu](mailto:LTS@uic.edu).

### Eligibility to complete the course for a satisfactory grade

This course covers a very large amount of content from the very first meeting
all the way through to the last day of class. To ensure that students that take
the course are all on the same page, the first assignment is exceptional in that
**submitting** the assignment by the due date is required to receive a passing
grade. This submission does not need to be correct, and if it is the student's
lowest homework grade, it will be dropped (see below for more details). However,
for students who do not turn in the first assignment on time, they will receive
an F in the course if they do not drop the course by the end of the add/drop
period.

### Email Expectations

Students are responsible for all information instructors send to your UIC email.
Faculty messages should be regularly monitored and read in a timely fashion.

Please use Piazza private messages shared with the **instructors** (not just the
professor or TA by name) if you wish to communicate with us directly. Please
only use email for something that explicitly should be kept private only to that
person.

Please email me if you face an unexpected situation that may impede your
attendance, participation in required class and exam sessions, or timely
completion of assignments.

## II. Course Information

Web applications integrate concepts from software engineering, systems
programming, and computer security. This course teaches security through web
development, enabling students to design, deploy, scale, attack, and defend
modern web applications.

Web applications are simultaneously one of the most widely used and widely
attacked forms of deployed code. At the same time, the concepts of computer
security are best taught within a relatable context so that students can
immediately apply their knowledge to relevant situations. The unique challenges
inherent in building secure web applications made available to billions of
potential users and attackers requires understanding how to use and integrate
concepts from software engineering, systems programming, and computer security.
This course integrates the concepts that underlie designing, deploying,
attacking, and defending web applications to provide students with a
foundational understanding of how to design and deploy scalable and secure web
applications.

This class will teach students the concepts and techniques that enable web
applications to maintain high performance in the face of numerous users and
attackers. Students will learn and be able to apply software engineering
concepts to manage the complexity of client‐side and server‐side software.
Students will learn and be able to apply computer systems concepts to manage the
scalability of the web application, and provide performant service to large
numbers of simultaneous users. Students will learn and be able to apply computer
security concepts to designing a web application which is robust to known and
unknown attacks. Students will gain familiarity and facility with modern tools
which enable creating applications that apply the aforementioned design,
performance, and security concepts. Students will learn and be able to apply
fundamental security concepts so that they can evaluate the security of future
application designs in the face of potential future attacks.

### Prerequisites

While this course doesn’t require mastery of specific content from previous
courses, it does require the ability to pick up new programming concepts
quickly. Thus, credit or concurrent registration in CS 341 is required, as
JavaScript incorporates rather esoteric concepts like closures, functional
programming, and quite a bit of event driven programming, and having seen these
paradigms previously will be of great help. Learning new languages and new
programming paradigms are common tasks in the life of a software engineer;
learning how to apply your underlying ability to decompose and systematize a
task using a new language will implicitly be part of your learning experience in
this class.

### _Growth Mindset_

Course materials and assignments can be complex and challenging, but they are
crucial to your intellectual and personal growth and development. There are
times you may need extra help. Students who attend class consistently, complete
all assignments, thoughtfully engage with feedback on work, develop good study
strategies, visit the tutoring center, and contact faculty when they are
struggling can develop a thorough understanding of the course material and
ultimately succeed in the course!

### Course Goals and Learning Outcomes

CS 484 satisfies the technical elective requirement for the Computer Science
major in the College of Engineering.

**Brief list of topics to be covered:** CS 484 covers the details of HTTP
protocols and the web ecosystem, the design and implementation of server side
web software, the design and implementation of client side web software,
computer security and web security fundamentals, and the synthesis of all of
these concepts into designing and implementing full fledged secure web
applications.

**Required and Recommended Course Materials**: There is no required book for
this course. Readings and videos will be assigned that are publicly available on
the Internet.

**Required Technology**: You are required to have a device capable of running
the iClicker cloud software (smartphone preferred), and a laptop for developing
software as part of the course assignments, activities, and projects.

**Respect for Copyright**: Please protect the copyright integrity of all course
materials and content. Please do not upload course materials not created by you
onto third-party websites or share content with anyone not enrolled in our
course.

### Disclaimer

This syllabus is intended to give the student guidance on what may be covered
during the semester and will be followed as closely as possible. However, as the
instructor, I reserve the right to modify, supplement, and make changes as
course needs arise. I will communicate such changes in advance through in-class
announcements and in writing via this website.

## III. COURSE POLICIES & CLASSROOM EXPECTATIONS

### Generative AI

You will almost certainly be using GenAI (ChatGPT, GitHub Copilot, Grammarly,
etc) in some way for the rest of your career. You are encouraged to use whatever
GenAI tools you would like to complete the assignments and final project in this
class.

While these tools are amazing, please do not use their existence as an excuse to
procrastinate on getting started with your assignments. They are good, but they
aren't that good.

Generative AI use is **strongly discouraged** for homework assignments. _We will
not perform any check to see whether you have done so or not_. The grading for
these assignments is lenient - the expected median grade for the class is 100%.

A substantial portion of the module exam will cover topics that are tightly tied
to the module's homework assignment. **Working your way through the homeworks
without the help of Generative AI is the best way to succeed at these
questions**.

Generative AI is **not allowed** on in class assessments. Generative AI use is
_encouraged_ for the final project, studying for in-class quizzes, and studying
for in-class exams.

### Grading Policy and Point Breakdown

Grades are curved based on an aggregate course score. There are separate curves
for graduate and undergraduate students. This means that the course score
cut-offs for an A, B, C etc. are not defined ahead of time: these will be set
after the end of the course.

The course grade weighting is:

| Task                                                      | % of total grade |
| --------------------------------------------------------- | ---------------- |
| Beginning of Class Quizzes                                | 10               |
| Class Participation                                       | 10               |
| Homeworks                                                 | 15               |
| Final Project (5 pt checkpoint + 10 pt final deliverable) | 15               |
| Module exams                                              | 50               |

### Dropped Assignments

To help students deal with unforeseen circumstances, religious observances, or
other issues that may arise during the semester, we will drop your lowest
homework, your lowest module exam, and your lowest four quiz scores. You do not
need to inform me of the reason for dropping the assignment - this drop is
automatic for all students.

#### Final grade assignment

I am committed to making sure the assessment of your learning in this course is
comprehensive, fair, and equitable. Your grade in this class will be based on
the number of points you earn out of the total number of points possible and is
not based on your rank relative to other students. Furthermore, grades are
assigned without strict limits on the proportion of each letter grade given in
the course. If the class mean is 75% or higher, letter grades will be based on a
straight scale using the following thresholds for grade cut-offs: A range from
90-100%, B range from 80-89.9%, C range from 70-79.9%, D range from 60-69.9%,
and F given to 59.9% or lower. If the class mean is lower than 75%, the scale
will be adjusted to compensate (e.g. 89% may become an A).

Under no circumstances will grades be adjusted down. You can use this straight
grading scale as an indicator of your minimum grade in the course at any time
during the course. You should keep track of your own points so that at any time
during the semester you may calculate your minimum grade based on the total
number of points possible at that particular time. If and when, for any reason,
you have concerns about your grade in the course, please email me to schedule a
time for you to speak with me or your TA so that we can discuss study techniques
or alternative strategies to help you.

After setting the letter grade cutoffs and dropping the lowest exam (see below
for more information), all students must have an exam average that is greater
than or equal to the overall grade cutoff for a passing (D or better) grade in
the course.

#### Homework late policy

Every assignment in this course is due at exactly the time stated on Gradescope,
and while we will grade late assignments, they earn zero credit.

Gradescope deadlines are _precise_ - an assignment is late if it was turned in
one millisecond or one month late.

Gradescope deadlines are _universal_ - you must turn in your code, and it
doesn't matter whether you didn't turn it in because it wasn't compiling, or
couldn't upload it to git, or couldn't upload it to gradescope. You can turn in
homework assignments an unlimited number of times, so we recommend that you turn
them in early and often.

Because these deadlines are so rigid, by default we will not include your lowest
homework in your final grade for the class. The later assignments and exams in
the course are more difficult than the earlier ones, and there is no exceptional
late policy - we recommend that you do not use these unless you genuinely need
to, so that they're available if unexpected issues come up.

If your lowest module exam, homework, quiz, or participation grades are higher
than your course average, we will include them in the calculation of your final
grade. This means that your lowest scores can't _hurt_ your final grade, they
can only help it, so it will always be worth it to complete every assignment
unless you literally already have a 100% grade in the class.

#### Evaluation

##### Beginning of class quizzes

Quizzes based on a basic understanding of the assigned readings and videos will
be given at the beginning of each class period using iClicker Cloud. Class
participation credit will be given for answering a certain percentage of all
questions asked each class period. Every student will have their four lowest
quizzes dropped, and class participation will be graded out of 25 total classes
(which means you can miss 4 classes and still receive 100% of quiz points).

##### Class Participation

Participation is an incredibly important facet of this course. The baseline
Class Participation grade will be based off of participating in classroom
discussion questions and answering questions via iClicker. (iClicker questions
are graded for participation, not correctness.) However, extra credit points may
be added for substantial contributions, entirely at the instructor's discretion.
Exceptional participation includes early reports of errors in assignments,
helpful discussion, contribution of helpful code to the common good of the class
(e.g. test cases and/or testing scripts) and thoughtful discussions during
lecture.

##### Homeworks

There are six homeworks planned for the semester. They are meant to be exercises
that introduce you to the practical implementation of the concepts covered in
class. Homeworks are more for your own benefit than for earning large portions
of your grade in the class (that's why they're a low portion of your overall
grade). Each exam will very likely include questions that will rely on your full
understanding of the previous homework assignments and their solutions.

Your lowest homework score is dropped from your final grade.

##### Module exams

This class uses a **module exam** structure instead of traditional midterms and
finals. Rather than a small number of high-stakes exams, there are five
different 50-minute exams evenly spaced through the course. They will focus on
each of the five different themes presented in the course, and while they will
not ask questions directly about previous modules, each module builds off of the
last, and understanding the content from previous modules may be needed to
answer questions on a subsequent exam.

We also drop your lowest module exam. The final module exam happens during the
final exam slot for the course, so if you're already happy with your grade at
the end of week 15, taking the final can only improve your grade, not lower it.

### Academic Integrity

Consulting with your classmates on assignments is encouraged, except where
noted. However, turn-ins are individual, and copying code from your classmates
is considered plagiarism. For example, given the question "how did you do X?", a
great response would be "I used function Y, with W as the second argument. I
tried Z first, but it didn't work". An inappropriate response would be "here is
my code, look for yourself". **You should never look at someone else's code, or
show someone else your code.** Either of these actions are considered academic
dishonesty (cheating) and will be prosecuted as such.

To avoid suspicion of plagiarism, you must specify your sources (including GenAI
tools) together with all turned-in materials. List classmates and GenAI tools
you discussed your homework with and webpages from which you got inspiration.
Plagiarism and cheating, as in copying the work of others, paying others to do
your work, etc, is obviously prohibited, and will be reported. We will be
running MOSS, an automated plagiarism detection tool, on all hand-ins. We will
be adding the solutions provided by ChatGPT and similar tools to the MOSS
assignment set, and anyone turning in code they do not fully understand will be
considered a violation of the academic integrity policy.

I report all suspected academic integrity violations to the dean of students. If
it is your first time, the dean of students may provide the option to informally
resolve the case - this means the student agrees that my description of what
happened is accurate, and the only repercussions on an institutional level are
that it is noted that this happened in your internal, UIC files (i.e. the dean
of students can see that this happened, but no professors or other people can,
and it is not in your transcript). If this is not your first academic integrity
violation in any of your classes, a formal hearing is held and the dean of
students decides on the institutional consequences. After multiple instances of
academic integrity violations, students may be suspended or expelled. For all
cases, the student has the option to go through a formal hearing if they believe
that they did not actually violate the academic integrity policy. If the dean of
students agrees that they did not, then I revert their grade back to the
original grade, and the matter is resolved.

If you are found responsible for violating the academic integrity policy, the
penalty can range from receiving a zero on the assignment in question, receiving
a grade deduction, or receiving an F in the class, depending on the severity of
the violation.

As a student and member of the UIC community, you are expected to adhere to the
[Community Standards](https://dos.uic.edu/community-standards/) of [academic
integrity](https://dos.uic.edu/community-standards/academic-integrity/),
accountability, and respect. Please review the [UIC Student Disciplinary
Policy](https://dos.uic.edu/wp-content/uploads/sites/262/2021/09/Student-Disciplinary-Policy-2021.pdf)
for additional information.

## IV. COURSE SCHEDULE

Please see the [Course Schedule](/schedule/) for a weekly schedule of topics and
activities.

## V. ACCOMMODATIONS

### Disability Accommodation Procedures

UIC is committed to full inclusion and participation of people with disabilities
in all aspects of university life. If you face or anticipate disability-related
barriers while at UIC, please connect with the Disability Resource Center (DRC)
at [drc.uic.edu](https://drc.uic.edu/), via email at
[drc@uic.edu](mailto:drc@uic.edu), or call (312) 413-2183 to create a plan for
reasonable accommodations. To receive accommodations, you will need to disclose
the disability to the DRC, complete an interactive registration process with the
DRC, and provide me with a Letter of Accommodation (LOA). Upon receipt of an
LOA, I will gladly work with you and the DRC to implement approved
accommodations.

### Religious Accommodations

Following [campus policy](https://oae.uic.edu/religious/), if you wish to
observe religious holidays, you must notify me by the tenth day of the semester.
If the religious holiday is observed on or before the tenth day of the semester,
you must notify me at least five days before you will be absent. Please submit
[this
form](https://oae.uic.edu/wp-content/uploads/sites/32/2019/07/StudentReligiousAccomodationRequestForm.pdf)
by email with the subject heading: **"YOUR NAME: Requesting Religious
Accommodation."**

## VI. CLASSROOM ENVIRONMENT

### Inclusive Community

UIC values diversity and inclusion. Regardless of age, disability, ethnicity,
race, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, socioeconomic status,
geographic background, religion, political ideology, language, or culture, we
expect all members of this class to contribute to a respectful, welcoming, and
inclusive environment for every other member of our class. If aspects of this
course result in barriers to your inclusion, engagement, accurate assessment, or
achievement, please notify me as soon as possible.

### Name and Pronoun Use

If your name does not match the name on my class roster, please let me know as
soon as possible. My pronouns are _[she/her; he/him; they/them]_. I welcome your
pronouns if you would like to share them with me. For more information about
pronouns, see this page:
[https://www.mypronouns.org/what-and-why](https://www.mypronouns.org/what-and-why).

### Community Agreement/Classroom Conduct Policy

- Be present by removing yourself from distractions, whether they be phone
  notifications, entire devices, conversations, or anything else.
- Be respectful of the learning space and community. For example, no side
  conversations or unnecessary disruptions.
- Use preferred names and gender pronouns.
- Assume goodwill in all interactions, even in disagreement.
- Facilitate dialogue and value the free and safe exchange of ideas.
- Try not to make assumptions, have an open mind, seek to understand, and not
  judge.
- Approach discussion, challenges, and different perspectives as an opportunity
  to "think out loud," learn something new, and understand the concepts or
  experiences that guide other people's thinking.
- Debate the concepts, not the person.
- Be gracious and open to change when your ideas, arguments, or positions do not
  work or are proven wrong.
- Be willing to work together and share helpful study strategies.
- Be mindful of one another's privacy, and do not invite outsiders into our
  classroom.

Furthermore, our class (in person and online) will follow the [CS Code of
Conduct](https://www.cs.uic.edu/~grad/CS_Code_of_Conduct.pdf). If you are not
adhering to our course norms, a case of behavior misconduct will be submitted to
the Dean of Students and to the Director of Undergraduate Studies in the
department of Computer Science. If you are not adhering to our course norms, you
will not get full credit for your work in this class. For extreme cases of
violating the course norms, credit for the course will not be given.

### Engaging with Course Content

Our classroom provides an open space for a critical and civil exchange of ideas,
inclusive of a variety of perspectives and positions. Some readings and other
content may expose you to ideas, subjects, or views that may challenge you,
cause you discomfort, or recall past negative experiences or traumas. I intend
to discuss all subjects with dignity and humanity, as well as with rigor and
respect for scholarly inquiry. If you would like me to be aware of a specific
topic of concern, please email or visit my Student Drop-In Hours.

### Student Parents

I know well how exhausting balancing school, childcare, and work can be. I would
like to help support you and accommodate your family's needs, so please don’t
keep me in the dark. I hope you will feel safe disclosing your student-parent
status to me so that I can help you anticipate and solve problems in a way that
makes you feel supported. Unforeseen disruptions in childcare often put parents
in the position of having to choose between missing classes to stay home with a
child or leaving them with a less desirable backup arrangement. While this is
not meant to be a long-term childcare solution, occasionally bringing a child to
class in order to cover gaps in care is perfectly acceptable If your baby or
young child comes to class with you, please plan to sit close to the door so
that you can step outside without disrupting learning for other students if your
child needs special attention. Non-parents in the class, please reserve seats
near the door for your parenting classmates or others who may need to step out
briefly.

## VII. RESOURCES: Academic Success, Wellness, and Safety

We all need the help and the support of our UIC community. Please visit my
**drop-in hours** for course consultation and other academic or research topics.
For additional assistance, please contact your assigned college advisor and
visit the support services available to all UIC students.

### Academic Success

- UIC [Tutoring Resources](https://tutoring.uic.edu/)
- College of Engineering [tutoring
  program](https:/engineeringequity.uic.edu/services/resources)
- [Equity and Inclusion in Engineering
  Program](https://engineeringequity.uic.edu/)
- [UIC Library](http://library.uic.edu/) and [UIC Library Research
  Guides](http://researchguides.uic.edu/).
- [Offices](https://ossb.uic.edu/offices/) supporting the UIC Undergraduate
  Experience and Academic Programs.
- [Student Guide for Information
  Technology](https://uofi.app.box.com/s/0nyho51r24yo0pivafibb1nvqogjm401)
- [First-at-LAS](https://first-at-las.uic.edu/) Academic Success Program,
  focusing on LAS first-generation students.

### Wellness

- **Counseling Services** : You may seek free and confidential services from the
  Counseling Center at
  [https://counseling.uic.edu/](https://counseling.uic.edu/).

- Access [U&I Care Program](https://dos.uic.edu/student-assistance/uicare/) for
  assistance with personal hardships.
- **Campus Advocacy Network** : Under Title IX, you have the right to an
  education that is free from any form of gender-based violence or
  discrimination. To make a report, email
  [TitleIX@uic.edu](mailto:TitleIX@uic.edu). For more information or
  confidential victim services and advocacy, visit UIC's Campus Advocacy Network
  at [http://can.uic.edu/](http://can.uic.edu/).

### Safety

- [UIC Safe App](https://ready.uic.edu/toolkit/uic-safe-app/)—PLEASE DOWNLOAD
  FOR YOUR SAFETY!
- [UIC Safety Tips and
  Resources](https://ready.uic.edu/toolkit/be-safe-and-prepared/other-safety-resources/)
- [Night Ride](https://transportation.uic.edu/night-ride/)
- [Emergency Communications](https://emergency.uic.edu/): By dialing 5-5555 from
  a campus phone, you can summon the Police or Fire for any on-campus emergency.
  You may also set up the complete number, (312) 355-5555, on speed dial on your
  cell phone.
