---
title: Introduction to HTTP and the Web
---

There's no way around it - if you're gonna learn about web development, you've got to understand the [Hypertext Transfer Protocol, HTTP](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9112.html). In this chapter, we'll be covering the basics of HTTP along with the other absolute basics of the web platform.

# What is the web, anyway?

## Technical version

The web is communication between web browsers and web servers using the HTTP and HTTPS protocols. This doesn't tell us much, but it is technically correct.

## More historical, more nuanced version

In the popular consciousness, "the Internet" and "the Web" were basically synonymous between the rise of the web and the rise of smartphone apps. Besides email, "the web" has been the main way to experience "the Internet" since the late 90's. Even email is very often accessed through a web interface, so to many, the terms are still synonymous.

## What you need to know for this course version

The web is fundamentally a _distributed system_ - it consists of multiple independent computers (including your computer, the server, and as we'll learn later on, many others) cooperating to provide a service to its users. The code running on the client side is usually a web browser, but it can also be a web scraping script, a mobile application, or even a web server making a request to a different web server.

# HTTP

- HTTP is a protocol - it's not an implementation, it's open, it's a set of rules for how to communicate
- Client - server protocol, client initiates connections (this will be relevant later)

# HTML, JavaScript, and CSS
