---
title: HTTP basics
---

If you're gonna learn about web development, you've got to understand the [Hypertext Transfer Protocol, HTTP](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9112.html).

# HTTP is a protocol

HTTP is a protocol - an open set of rules for how to send bytes back and forth between two computers to perform some useful work on behalf of the humans that operate those computers. A **protocol** is just a set of rules that a bunch of humans have agreed to follow when they _do_ something. Just like you can only meaningfully play standard chess if you follow the rules of chess, you can only do HTTP if you follow the rules of HTTP - so that the two computers talking to each other understand the meaning behind the bytes being sent back and forth.

## Layering

As a quick aside into a more networking-focused topic, standard HTTP is built on top of the **Internet Protocol** (IP) and the **Transmission Control Protocol** (TCP). Layering gives protocol designers a set of features they can use to build on top of. TCP and IP give us:

- Client-server communication: clients _initiate_ communication with servers, and thus they need to know the IP address of the server they want to connect to. Servers need to be able to accept those connections from anywhere on the Internet if they want to make their service available to the entire world.
- Two-way, reliable, in order, bytestream communication: this sounds really complicated, but it basically means that if the client sends bytes 123456, the server will receive 123456, it won't receive 123654, it won't receive 123 (and nothing else), and it won't receive 456123, and the same goes for the server sending messages to the client. In reality, we don't send individual bytes across the internet, they're actually sent within individual chunks. After these chunks are received, the operating system effectively "glues" together the ordered list of bytes with no border in between.

## Basic semantics of HTTP

Now that we're building on top of TCP/IP, there are a few basic rules that make HTTP unique as a protocol:

The client always communicates first. This makes intuitive sense, because it's the client that wants something, that's why they connected to the server in the first place.

All HTTP communication consists of individual client requests, followed by individual server responses. Multiple request/response pairs can happen within the same connection, but each one is independent of the others.

Each message has a _status line_, _headers_, and a _body_. The status line as well as the individual headers are delimited by the special string `\r\n`. The border between the entire list of headers and the body is a "blank" header, which can be simplified down to looking for the special string `\r\n\r\n` (aka the end of a header and then another end of header immediately after it). Because `\r\n` renders as a newline in most editors, you may also see people say that a "blank line" is the border between the headers and the body. Depending on what kind of message it is, the body may be blank.

### The request line

The first line of data sent by the client (called the **request line**) indicates which **method** the client is using, which **resource** the client is requesting, and which **protocol version** the client is using to make that request.

### The border between HTTP and your web application

Before we get into more of the nitty gritty of HTTP, it's important to understand a bit more historical context of how HTTP was designed and how it has been used. In the beginning

### The Status line

# A brief history of HTTP versions

# HTML, JavaScript, and CSS

# Further reading

- [Brief History of HTTP](https://hpbn.co/brief-history-of-http/): the entirety of "High Performance Browser Networking" is a great introduction to the lower level nuts and bolts of making HTTP fast, with a focus on the network side of things.
